After numerous temporary suspensions of the Sustainable Growth Rate formula (SGR) since 2003 and just hours before a large SGR-induced rate cut would have gone into effect, Congress passed a permanent "doc fix," the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA) on April 14, 2015. The next day, a Kaiser Health News reporter optimistically declared "Medicare's troubled physician payment formula will soon be history"[@Carey2015]. Referring to the fact he and his colleagues would no longer have to pass temporary SGR-suspension measures after failed negotiations every few months, Rep. Fred Upton (R-Michigan) said, "Stick a fork in it, it's finally done."

Looking no further than the overwhelming bipartisan support for MACRA’s passage in both chambers, this ebullience seems well-founded. But is the fight over Medicare provider payments over? MACRA’s move toward value-based payments is significant, part of a larger trend in policy and industry away from volume-based payments. However, the fundamental political tension in payment policy between stakeholder groups, exacerbated by SGR, is not fully resolved in MACRA. SGR and MACRA are similar in that they are both episodes of a broader debate over provider payment models. I argue that as implementation proceeds, we will reach a point where existential debates over MACRA’s Quality Payment Program (QPP) will occupy time on the congressional agenda, similar to those fought over SGR after 2002.

This is so for three reasons. First, the payment model MACRA institutes in place of SGR is not itself a stable compromise. Second, the tools used to gather approval for this permanent doc fix were mostly political, leading to a solution that is severable from the rest of the bill and therefore politically vulnerable. Finally, nothing in the broader political context indicates a lasting détente on this issue, despite the temporary truce we now see. For these reasons, it is likely the payment models in MACRA will be challenged politically.

# MACRA's payment models do not resolve the underlying conflict.[@Wynne2016]

MACRA came about as an attempt to resolve disputes between various stakeholders over Medicare provider payment models. Despite being hailed as a compromise that will last permanently, MACRA does not actually resolve the underlying dispute it is meant to solve, and therefore is an unstable compromise.

## The SGR Debate

In the debate over Medicare payment models generally, three of the principal groups of participants are healthcare providers, fiscal conservatives ("budget hawks"), and patient advocates, especially those representing the elderly. These groups can include both organized elements that directly lobby Congress and unorganized groups of voters who might be activated if their interests are threatened. SGR placed these three groups in direct conflict.

Congressional budget hawks were responsible for SGR in the first place. Taking advantage of rising federal revenues, congressional Republicans shifted gears after the 1996 election from grand crusades on health care policy to piecemeal cost-cutting measures[@Starr2011]. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 contained many such measures, including the SGR. Were it not for the many temporary suspensions of SGR, the budget hawks' zeal for fiscal responsibility would have led to cuts which doctors (and many others) felt were unbearably draconian[@Laugesen2009].

Patient advocates worried about what would happen to patients' access to medical care if SGR were to actually go into effect. Doctors worry about access, too, at least in the sense that low Medicare payment rates would prevent them from serving and gaining revenue from a significant customer segment. However, the patient advocates are not entirely in the doctors' camp. Particularly when it comes to quality, they are more in line with conservatives in wanting greater value in return for whatever providers are paid. Still, these advocates, along with the political liberals who often join them, are more willing to engage in deficit spending to achieve quality goals, making them a distinct third party in the debate.

Once the doctors and patient advocates realized what SGR would mean for reimbursement and access, there was overwhelming bipartisan support for replacing the SGR with a payment model that would be deemed more responsible[@Oberlander2015b]. Even some of the budget hawks felt SGR might have gone too far. For political reasons, SGR was doomed to fail almost from the start. Once it became clear SGR was going to lead to significant rate cuts, physician groups pressured Congress to temporarily suspend the SGR's implementation numerous times over more than a decade. These suspensions occurred under both Presidents Bush and Obama, and under both Republican and Democratic congressional majorities. Organized physician groups were able to exert disproportionate influence to prevent SGR cuts from taking effect by framing the policy as unpredictable and unreliable[@Laugesen2009].

The reason all the suspensions were only temporary was that stakeholder groups could not agree on how to replace SGR, and particularly how to fund a replacement[@Oberlander2015b]. Budget hawks are not always inherently opposed to spending if it can be paid for. It is deficit spending in particular they take issue with, and Medicare is one of the largest drivers of federal budget deficits. If SGR were repealed and doctors given higher reimbursement rates, then the money would have to come from somewhere else. Within the Medicare budget, that would mean having at least some beneficiaries pay higher premiums and, through cost-sharing mechanisms, take on more financial responsibility for keeping costs down. Liberals and patient advocates would not go along willingly with these proposals. Liberals also would not tolerate cuts to other programs to pay for an increase in Medicare expenses, and tax increases are generally out of the question in American politics. Despite agreement that SGR had to go, arguments over funding for a permanent doc fix left Congress at an impasse for over a decade.

## The Quality Payment Program

MACRA seemed to many observers to portend a significant change in the status quo. Among other things, the bill repealed SGR (rather than temporarily delaying implementation) and laid the framework for a new payment model, the QPP, with two tracks: the Merit-based Incentive Payments System (MIPS) and the Alternative Payment Model (APM) track.  While the AMA itself billed this new model as giving doctors choice in Medicare reimbursement issues[@amand], neither of these choices will be acceptable to doctors when implemented, at least not as long as the other stakeholders maintain their positions.

### MIPS

The MIPS option in MACRA, which the AMA says will likely be the primary payment method for the beginning stages of implementation[@Madara2015], replaces three prior quality measures with a single composite performance score, on which bonuses and penalties will be based. The modifiers increase to a range of -9% and +9% by 2022 and continue at these levels in perpetuity. As long as it was all theoretical, doctors were probably strongly enticed by the possibility of 9% bonuses. However, two other features of the law ensure that a significant number of providers will face negative bonuses and feel it.

First, the program is mandated to be budget neutral, meaning the sum of all adjustments across all providers will be zero. This introduces competitive incentives into the industry. With these competitive pressures and the budget neutrality requirement, the bonus in expectation is actually zero, despite the increased effort required to achieve it. In order to not be assessed a penalty, doctors will have to make whatever investments are necessary to get a MIPS score above the median, increasing costs. Perhaps some will be able to achieve bonuses that can actually offset higher costs, but this will only exacerbate the plight of the doctors who then must be assessed penalties to keep the bonuses budget-neutral. If there are any winners, there have to be losers. Doctors as a group thus have an economic reason to be dissatisfied with a new arrangement that forces them into a prisoners' dilemma situation. Once the dust of the SGR battle settles and the nice theories about 9% bonuses turn into less rosy realities, doctors may find their victory is not quite what they had in mind.

Second, the base rates themselves are not set to increase as much after the MIPS provisions kick in. Between 2020 and 2025, rate increases are fixed at zero. Thereafter, physicians still participating in MIPS will only receive base rate increases of 0.25% per year. This likely is not enough to offset rising costs, meaning those cost increases will impact doctors' bottom lines. Because base rates will not keep up with the cost increases required to avoid penalties, MIPS will quickly become another reviled Medicare payment model, like the SGR before it.

### APMs

If MIPS is not acceptable, doctors can choose to enter the APM track instead. However, many of the same issues exist in this track as in MIPS, though in different form. This track incentivizes physicians to enter alternative payment models (APMs), such as accountable care organizations (ACOs) by providing 5% annual lump sum bonuses on their Medicare payments from 2019 to 2024. Thereafter, base rates for APM participants will increase by 0.75% (instead of 0.25%, as in MIPS).

Some physicians have seen significant financial benefits from participation in APMs, but not all. Furthermore, in order to satisfy both the budget hawks and patient advocates, APMs will need to force providers to accept more financial risk by facing penalties for not hitting quality benchmarks and by pushing more patients into APMs (which might decrease the average health of the relevant risk pools). Otherwise, the interests that supported SGR and value-based payment models in the first place will begin to seek more drastic measures to achieve their goals.

The key statutory language here is the requirement that physicians in APMs assume "more than nominal risk." While it was all just talk, this probably sounded fine for doctors, especially compared to SGR. However, the AMA has already expressed concerns to CMS that if the measures and programs in the APM track (and MIPS) are not set up "correctly," physicians will not be able to succeed in the programs[@Madara2015]. Physicians and physician groups are lobbying CMS to approve new APM models, which will probably be set up in ways favorable to physicians[@Advantedge2015]. These actions have in turn led progressives, patient advocates, and even fiscal conservatives to lament that because the statutory requirements for quality measures are rather sparse, doctors will have a disproportionate influence on the rulemaking process, allowing them to essentially write their own rules[@Kliff2015], as has been the case with Medicare providers in the past[@Balla1998]. These disgruntled groups' recourse is to go back to Congress and start crying foul play.

Furthermore, use of the APM model as it is likely to be implemented could lead to consolidation in the provider industry, with more physicians joining hospital groups and other large provider groups[@Kutscher2016]. Small physician practices will not be able to succeed in the APM track, and will be stuck with the less desirable MIPS track if they do not consolidate. If they do consolidate, then a more concentrated provider industry will be even more ideally situated to extract concessions from government agencies, to the chagrin of their opposing stakeholders. Either way, no one is going to be happy with the APM track. It was not designed in a way that allows it to satisfy all sides, and that will become even more apparent as details and final rules come forth.

### Rulemaking

Significant grumbling ensued following a proposed final rule issued by CMS on April 27, 2016[@cms2016a; @Kuhrt2016]. AMA president Steven Stack seemed satisfied that "CMS has been listening to physicians' concerns"[@Byers2016], but the provider community's response still indicated they were not fully satisfied with the proposed implementation and would likely try to get more concessions. On the other hand, American Hospital Association president Tom Nickels expressed deep disappointment with "CMS's narrow definition of alternative payment models, which could have a chilling effect on providers' ability to experiment with new patient-centered, value-driven payment models"[@Byers2016].

Federal officials took thousands of comments on the proposed rule, mostly from providers and related groups. Among the biggest complaints they received were the inflexibility in the rule and the ambitious timeline for implementation. The final rule, released by CMS on October 14, 2016[@cms2016b], was predictably more flexible. It allows for varying degrees of compliance with MIPS in 2017, as well as joint reporting by small rural practices. The initial reactions to the final rule from the provider community were mostly positive, but interestingly still included many of the same concerns about flexibility[@Rappleye2016]. The Medical Group Management Association, for example, said, "It's disappointing that flexibility provided for quality reporting in 2017 largely disappears in 2018 and beyond." Unfortunately for those holding this position, there isn't much more flexibility in the statute for CMS to take. Provider groups do not seem to be satisfied without the flexibility to completely opt out of the QPP, a concern they will eventually have to take up with Congress.

Budget hawks and patient advocates, the other stakeholders in this issue, will certainly not be pleased to see their favorite parts of MACRA watered down by CMS rules. If physicians do not end up assuming what budget hawks feel is "more than nominal risk," or if quality of care and truly value-based payments do not increase as much as patient advocates would like, then legislative battles will resume, perhaps with legal challenges as well.

## An Unstable Compromise

As long as the stakeholders in the argument do not relinquish their positions or realize different interests, there is no scenario under which all sides will be completely happy with the QPP as implemented. Oberlander and Laugesen[@Oberlander2015b] point out that "physician payments are both a source of income and an instrument of cost containment. The result is an inevitable tension in health policy: medical professionals typically want higher payments, whereas governments prefer to pay less." QPP is an unstable compromise because as these groups continue to lobby Congress for changes, legislators will listen and respond. The fight will probably begin anew in the administrative rulemaking arena as MACRA is implemented, but inevitably it will spill back into Congress. SGR has been replaced not by a fix, but by a temporary truce as a new lightning rod for debate is erected.

# MACRA's payment model is severable, and therefore politically vulnerable.

If MACRA does not solve the underlying conflict over payment models, how did it pass in the first place? Research on policy feedbacks[@Campbell2012; @Oberlander2015; @Pierson1993; @Pierson2000], suggests that broad reform packages can gain political support by including proposals different groups will like. Indeed, there is something for everyone in MACRA, or at least enough that the bill passed without creating any significant backlash from the public or from key stakeholder groups. However, this left the payment model piece vulnerable to future political attack.

MACRA engages in a fair amount of obvious logrolling across issues, stretching its scope far beyond a simple reform of Medicare payment models[@Congress2015]. Liberals got an extension on CHIP, but not full funding for the reauthorization. Fiscal conservatives got more means-testing of Part B and D premiums and a budget neutrality clause in the new MIPS payment track, but they also had to swallow an additional $141 billion in deficit spending. Doctors got a repeal of the SGR and an opportunity to rework or replace certain onerous and opaque quality measures, but not without putting themselves on the hook for more significant investments in care quality and commitment to value-based payment models with "more than nominal risk." The elderly and patient advocates got rid of the SGR's threats to provider access and higher physician commitment to patient quality, but had to trade away first-dollar Medigap coverage and accept higher premiums for Medicare beneficiaries.[@EndnoteText2]

Many of these provisions are entirely superfluous to the new payment models, but they helped make the bill politically palatable for a wide range of groups. MACRA's reauthorization of CHIP, for example, is probably widely popular. If a member of Congress is ever challenged on his/ her MACRA vote in a campaign setting, it will be very easy to respond with a statement like "I voted to give health insurance to poor kids and improve care access for our seniors." Such a statement would likely placate all but the most conscientious fiscal conservatives. Conservatives themselves can also honestly say they were supporting responsible Medicare payment reform and voted for the rich to pay their fair share instead of benefiting at the taxpayers' expense. It is no accident that CHIP reauthorization, a ban on first-dollar Medigap coverage, and means-testing for Medicare premiums all ended up in a bill meant ostensibly to deal with the SGR.

Politically, MACRA was a huge success because it successfully brought enough benefits to the groups involved and did not provoke other groups or the general public in any significant way. However, this short-term political success may have come at the expense of enacting a more effective solution to Medicare's fiscal woes. The payment model itself is entirely severable from the rest of MACRA. In legal and logistical terms, it could be removed very easily without affecting CHIP, Medigap, means-testing, or any of the more attractive features of the bill. An outright repeal of MACRA or the QPP is unlikely because it would probably revert the relevant portions of the US Code to the SGR, but that does not mean the QPP itself would not be significantly altered by another "permanent doc fix." The QPP's severability leaves it politically vulnerable despite the widespread support for the bill in which it was passed.

# MACRA is business as usual.

The only thing that can save MACRA from itself is a meaningful change in the political context, such as a policy window created by economic and political forces[@Kingdon1995]. There is nothing to suggest that political or economic factors are changing in a way that would help MACRA's case. Three facts support this point. First, MACRA as a piece of legislation actually looks quite similar to other recent health legislation, including some of the former SGR suspension bills. Second, the 2016 election appears to have actually strengthened both sides of the provider payment debate. Finally, MACRA does not get the feedbacks right, meaning it will do nothing to prevent future debate over its existence.

## SGR II

Though MACRA was different than previous temporary doc fix bills in that it permanently repealed SGR rather than merely delaying implementation, the qualitative differences essentially end there. MACRA looks like any other doc fix bill. For example, the 2014 temporary fix was not just a bill to delay SGR implementation. Among other things, it also extended maternal, infant, and early childhood visiting programs enacted previously, delayed the transition of medical coding systems to ICD-10 until October 2015, and amended the ACA to remove limits on deductibles in employer-sponsored plans[@Congress2014]. There was something for everyone in the 2014 bill, a pattern which should sound familiar after the discussion above about logrolling in MACRA. Prior SGR bills show similar patterns. Because no one could agree on exactly what to do with SGR, doing anything required a lot of compromises on irrelevant policies and programs.

Both MACRA and the SGR bills epitomized eleventh-hour brinksmanship. MACRA's passage literally hours before severe rate cuts were scheduled to take effect was by then a very predictable plot twist. Congress had practiced this dangerous maneuver before. Some SGR suspension bills were even passed after cuts took effect, with the bills undoing the cuts retroactively. This is not simply an amusing sidebar in the history of Medicare payment reform. Rather, it shows quite clearly that Congress could not figure out what to do about this policy no one liked, and that did not change with MACRA. The same maneuvers that led to the temporary suspensions were used to craft the permanent doc fix. Certainly the fact that SGR itself is now gone forever has brought temporary relief, but MACRA is in many respects no different than any other doc fix bill. The only difference is that it replaced SGR with another policy with which no one in Congress will know what to do after implementation begins in earnest.

MACRA is also similar to SGR in its initially being heralded as a magic "silver bullet" that would solve all our healthcare woes, specifically through better management of health resource utilization[@Marmor2012b]. This thinking has only led to disappointment, and there is not yet enough evidence to suggest that value-based payments will work either[@Vladeck2012]. It might be the case that dumping SGR at this point in time was made possible partly by the emergence of the value-based payment movement as a "logically powerful" alternative, as Bruce Vladeck calls it, despite also being "inconsistent with the facts"[@Vladeck2012]. To all sides in this debate who had tired long ago of the recurring SGR controversy, this new idea probably sounded like a great way to finally end the drama. Throughout the whole SGR ordeal, the bipartisan consensus was that SGR had to go. All MACRA did was embody that consensus in a bill to which almost no one had other objections. The MACRA vote was probably more of a vote to repeal SGR than to enact QPP.

## The Trump Effect

Even the surprise election of Donald Trump and a unified Republican government does not change the essential underlying context of the debate. If anything, Trump's election will only serve to strengthen the position of the budget hawks, who seem to have been put on the disadvantage during the Obama years.

MACRA's passage was a tactical win for doctors in the sense that it relieved them of SGR and all its apocalyptic uncertainty. The medical community came out ahead, even though their victory was far from secure. What Donald Trump's election does is legitimize the budget hawks' position, at least rhetorically. When the President-elect of the United States threatens to cancel Boeing's contract for Air Force One, citing cost, budget hawks on congressional health committees will be emboldened to take similarly austere stances toward Medicare payments. Even if some of the policies put forth by Trump himself are likely to add to deficit spending, his election has changed the nature of the conversation in Washington, DC surrounding the federal budget. Budget hawks certainly will continue to have significant opposition from providers and progressives, so it is unlikely that something like SGR will return in the near-future, but when doctors come back to Congress asking for more budget authorizations for QPP, congressional Republicans will likely try their best to say "no." Physicians are unlikely to take "no" for an answer when their livelihoods are on the line, and thus the conflict will continue.

On the other hand, it is also worth noting that Trump's new Health and Human Services Secretary, Tom Price, has at times come out against various alternative payment models, such as bundled payments. As a medical doctor himself, he is a staunch advocate of providers' views on payment. The Trump election legitimizes the position of the budget hawks in general, but his pick of Tom Price paradoxically also strengthens the hands of providers. On the issue of provider payments, expect to see these camps come into direct conflict.

## Feedback

Had MACRA been crafted differently, it may have been able to engineer its own long-term support. This kind of feedback effect helped make the Medicare program one of the most firmly entrenched social policies in America just a few years after its passage in 1965. After years of intense opposition, Medicare passed on a huge wave of support for liberal Democrats in the 1964 election, a wave without which Medicare might not have been able to make it ashore[@Oberlander2003; @Starr1982]. Doctors themselves, previously vehement opponents of a massive government intrusion into their livelihood, quickly changed their opinions of the program in part because it became one of their most important revenue sources[@Colombotos1969b]. In the half-century since its passage, Medicare has generally been viewed by all sides as a baseline policy from which marginal adjustments will be made (witness the rise of Medicare Advantage, the Part D prescription Drug benefit, etc.), rather than being itself an object of existential debate.

Part of this successful consolidation around Medicare was the way it was designed and implemented. Policy feedback research attests that Medicare got the feedbacks right in many important ways[@Campbell2011; @Oberlander2015]. Medicare catalyzed its own political support by quickly building a supportive constituency for the program itself that consisted of players on both sides of the pre-passage debates. Implementation also went smoothly, denying would-be opponents any opportunities to call for writing the program off as an administrative failure.

MACRA has none of these advantages. As discussed above, the MACRA compromise is both unstable and politically vulnerable. It simply was not designed to avoid significant debate over its major provisions. As the various groups resume their battle positions, the coalition of support around the payment models in MACRA will be severely challenged. Doctors will want quality measures with no bite and higher reimbursements. Patient advocates and budget hawks will attempt to move the dial the other way. Neither side will be happy with the way the program is implemented. MACRA, like SGR before it, will be caught in the middle of the debate.

# MACRA will not endure as passed.

MACRA is not a permanent resolution of the debates over Medicare payment models. The new model is itself an unstable compromise that is severable from the more favorable elements of the bill and not likely to be saved by changes in political context, whether exogenous or self-induced. MACRA has effected a temporary truce by delaying implementation of the new model for a few more years, but providers, policy makers, and other stakeholders in the debate can expect to be back in the trenches of this war before too long. As Oberlander and Laugesen[@Oberlander2015b] put it, "The SGR is gone, but there is no permanent fix for physician payment."

What would a permanent solution look like? While I cannot prescribe such a policy in detail, I can comment on three political factors required for a successful, permanent resolution. First, there almost certainly needs to be a realignment of stakeholder interests. This realignment could be induced by a new policy, as occurred when Medicare implementation led doctors to rethink their opposition to the new cash cow, or it could occur exogenously as factors realign and savvy policy entrepreneurs[see @Kingdon1995] exploit an opportunity to solidify any temporary consensus on what should be done. For example, if budget hawks are able to generate budget surpluses without changing Medicare, that would be a good time to address Medicare payment models with the budgetary constraints and time pressures at least temporarily removed. Even if the surpluses disappear, a policy could be designed and implemented during the window of opportunity that consolidates political support and becomes the new baseline for marginal changes.

Second, a lasting compromise policy will need to be able to stand on its own without making extraneous compromises. Such compromises only serve to pass a bill, and do nothing politically for the new program during implementation. To the extent that compromise occurs, it should occur within the payment model itself, or the compromise will be a sham. All the relevant stakeholders need to have a reason to support the compromise, not just the bill, and that support needs to last not just until the President signs it but also after CMS issues final rules.

Third, there may need to be a significant reframing of the issue for the broader public. The public, to the extent they know about this issue at all, currently understands it in terms of access to physicians. This is evidenced by the way MACRA was titled: it is an Act dealing with Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization. That puts the public firmly, if often unknowingly, on the side of "their doctors," as the AMA so often phrases it. With the public sidelined in this manner, stakeholder groups are free to continue their squabbling largely out of the public eye. Contrast this with the debate over the original SGR enactment, which came as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and was framed only as an attempt to make the federal government more fiscally responsible. With party competition now as fierce as ever in Medicare's history, overall public opinion is a significant factor in congressional policymaking. If the public sent clear enough signals to elected officials that they wanted something specific done, elected officials would have almost no choice but to listen, whatever the organized stakeholders thought.

