# 4. Conclusions and Implications for MACRA's Political Future

My dissertation so far has examined three factors that affect congressional policy making. Chapter 1 has examined the effects of party competition on responsiveness to public opinion. I find that significant competition between the two major parties does serve to increase responsiveness to the public at the level of the individual legislator, with effects at the aggregate level being somewhat weaker. In recent years, it is difficult to estimate these effects because of the generally high levels of party competition and low variance across districts.

Chapter 2 explored the effects of both organized unorganized interest groups on health policy positions in Congress. While much of the work in that chapter was exploratory, the data presented do suggest a relationship between unorganized groups of voters and the positions their elected officials take, independent of party, district average public opinion, and organized interest group contributions. The results also suggest that context matters a great deal in determining which groups will be influential.

Chapter 3 examined the nature of public opinion itself, using the Affordable Care Act as a case study. The survey experiment reported on in that chapter indicates that opinion on the ACA is malleable and depends on what pieces of the law people think about at the time of response. In the real world, this implies that which parts of the ACA are highlighted and how it is discussed publicly will affect its future. Policy pork, as defined in the chapter, can build up support, but wedge provisions in the law can serve to entrench the opposition further. These implications can also be applied to other complex, highly visible reform bills.

In this concluding chapter, I examine another recent piece of health legislation, the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA). I will draw on the conclusions of the prior three chapters to inform my discussion of the law's past and my predictions about its future.

After seventeen temporary suspensions of the Sustainable Growth Rate formula (SGR) since 2003 and just hours before a large SGR-induced rate cut would have gone into effect, Congress passed a permanent "doc fix," the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA) on April 14, 2015. The next day, a Kaiser Health News reporter optimistically declared "Medicare's troubled physician payment formula will soon be history" [@Carey2015]. Referring to the fact he and his colleagues would no longer have to pass temporary SGR-suspension measures after failed negotiations every year, Rep. Fred Upton (R-Michigan) said, "Stick a fork in it, it's finally done."

Looking no further than the overwhelming bipartisan margins by which MACRA passed both chambers, this ebullience seems well-founded. But is the fight over Medicare provider payments really over? The bill's move toward value-based payments is significant, part of a larger trend in policy and industry away from volume-based payments. However, the fundamental tension between providers and policy makers in terms of payment, exacerbated by SGR, is not fully resolved in MACRA. Whereas MACRA has been hailed as a significant improvement in the status quo, a new baseline from which only minor adjustments will be made for the foreseeable future, can we expect this to actually be the case? Based on the findings of my dissertation, I argue that although the battle over SGR is over, the war over payment models in general is far from concluded. MACRA has effected a paradigm shift in Medicare payment policy, but in doing so has set the field of the next battles over Medicare payments.

This is so for three reasons. First, the payment model MACRA institutes in place of SGR is not a stable compromise. Second, the tools used to gather approval for this permanent doc fix were mostly political, leading to a solution that is severable from the rest of the bill and therefore politically vulnerable. Finally, the context in which MACRA passed is neither unique nor temporary, indicating that the bill is not even a departure from business as usual in the health policymaking arena, but rather bears important resemblances to previous doc fix bills. For these reasons, it is likely that the payment models in MACRA will be challenged politically and probably altered during or very soon after implementation.

## 4.1 MACRA's payment models do not resolve the underlying conflict.

MACRA came about as an attempt to resolve disputes between various stakeholders over Medicare provider payment models. Despite being hailed as a compromise that will last permanently, MACRA does not actually resolve the underlying dispute it is meant to solve, and therefore is an unstable compromise.

### 4.1.1 The SGR Debate

In the debate over Medicare payment models generally, three of the principal groups of participants were doctors and other healthcare providers, fiscal conservatives ("budget hawks"), and patient advocates, especially those representing the elderly. As discussed in chapter 2, these groups can include both organized elements that directly lobbied Congress and unorganized groups of voters who might be activated if their interests are threatened. SGR placed these three groups in direct conflict.

The budget hawks were the ones responsible for SGR in the first place. Their zeal for fiscal responsibility would have led to cuts which doctors (and many others) felt were unbearably draconian. Patient advocates worried about what would happen to patients' access to medical care if SGR were to actually go into effect. Doctors themselves worry about access, too, at least in the sense that low Medicare payment rates would prevent them from serving and gaining revenue from a significant customer segment. However, the patient advocates are not entirely in the doctors' camp. Particularly when it comes to quality, they are more in line with conservatives in wanting greater value in return for whatever providers are paid. Still, these advocates, along with the political liberals who often join them, are more willing to engage in deficit spending to achieve quality goals, making them a distinct third party in the debate.

Once the doctors and patient advocates realized what SGR would mean for reimbursement and access, there was overwhelming bipartisan support for replacing the SGR with a payment model that would be deemed more responsible. Even some of the budget hawks felt SGR might have gone too far. For political reasons, SGR was doomed to fail almost from the start. It is no surprise that Congress voted seventeen times to temporarily suspend the SGR's implementation.

The reason all the suspensions were only temporary was that the stakeholder groups could not agree on how to replace SGR, and particularly how to fund a replacement.[^1] Budget hawks are not inherently opposed to spending if it can be paid for. It was deficit spending in particular they took issue with, and Medicare is one of the largest drivers of federal budget deficits. If SGR were repealed and doctors given higher reimbursement rates, then the money would have to come from somewhere else. Within the Medicare budget, that would mean having at least some beneficiaries pay higher premiums and, through cost-sharing mechanisms, take on more financial responsibility for keeping costs down. Liberals and patient advocates would not go along willingly with these proposals. Liberals also would not tolerate cuts to other programs to pay for an increase in Medicare expenses, and tax increases are generally out of the question in American politics. Despite agreement that SGR had to go, arguments over funding for a permanent doc fix left Congress at an impasse for over a decade.

### 4.1.2 The MACRA Payment Model

MACRA seemed to many observers to portend a significant change in the status quo. Among other things, the bill repealed SGR (rather than temporarily delaying implementation) and laid the framework for a new payment model. This model contains two tracks: the Merit-based Incentive Payments System (MIPS) and the Alternative Payment Model (APM) track.[^2] While the AMA itself billed this new model as giving doctors choice in Medicare reimbursement issues [@amand], I argue that neither of these choices will be acceptable to doctors when implemented, at least not as long as the other stakeholders maintain their positions.

#### 4.1.2.1 MIPS Track

The MIPS option in MACRA, which the AMA says will likely be the primary payment method for at least the beginning stages of implementation [@Madara2015], replaces three prior quality measures with a single composite performance score, on which bonuses and penalties will be based. The rates are set to start at between -4% and +4% of base rates in 2019, with the range increasing to modifiers between -9% and +9% by 2022 and continuing at these levels in perpetuity. The bonuses/ penalties will be added or subtracted from the usual Medicare Part B base rate.

As long as it was all theoretical, doctors were probably strongly enticed by the possibility of 9% bonuses over current rates. However, two other factors in the law ensure that a significant number of providers will face negative bonuses and feel it.

First, the program is mandated to be budget neutral, meaning the sum of all adjustments across all providers will be zero. This introduces competitive incentives into the industry. In order to not be assessed a penalty, doctors will have to make whatever investments are necessary to get a MIPS score above the median. This will increase doctors' total costs, even if they are not assessed a penalty by CMS. With these competitive pressures and the budget neutrality requirement, the bonus in expectation is actually zero, despite the increased effort required to achieve it. Doctors as a group thus have an economic reason to be dissatisfied with a new arrangement that forces them into a prisoners' dilemma situation. Once the dust of the SGR battle settles and the nice theories about 9% bonuses turn into less rosy realities, doctors may find their victory is not quite what they had in mind.

Second, the base rates themselves are not set to increase as much after the MIPS provisions kick in. In fact, between 2020 and 2025, rate increases are fixed at zero. Thereafter, physicians still participating in MIPS will only receive base rate increases of 0.25% per year. This likely is not nearly enough to offset the rising costs mentioned above, meaning those costs will have noticeable impacts on doctors' bottom lines. Perhaps some will be able to achieve bonuses that can actually offset the costs, but this will only exacerbate the plight of the doctors who then must be assessed penalties to keep the bonuses budget-neutral. If there are any winners, there have to be losers. Because base rates will not keep up with the cost increases required to avoid large penalties, MIPS will quickly become another reviled Medicare payment model, like the SGR before it.

#### 4.1.2.2 APM Track

If MIPS is not acceptable, doctors can choose to enter the APM track instead. However, many of the same issues exist in this track as in MIPS, though in different form. This track essentially incentivizes physicians to enter alternative payment models (APMs), such as accountable care organizations (ACOs) by providing 5% annual lump sum bonuses on their Medicare payments from 2019 to 2024. Thereafter, base rates for APM participants will increase by 0.75% (instead of 0.25%, as in MIPS).

Some physicians have seen significant financial benefits from participation in APMs, but not all. Furthermore, in order to satisfy both the budget hawks and patient advocates, APMs will need to force providers to accept more financial risk by facing penalties for not hitting quality benchmarks and by pushing more patients into APMs (which might decrease the average health of the relevant risk pools). Otherwise, the interests that supported SGR and value-based payment models in the first place will begin to seek more drastic measures to achieve their goals.

The key statutory language here is the requirement that physicians in APMs assume "more than nominal risk." While it was all just talk, this probably sounded fine for doctors. However, the AMA has already expressed concerns to CMS that if the measures and programs in the APM track (and MIPS) are not set up "correctly," physicians will not be able to succeed in the programs [@Madara2015]. Physicians and physician groups are lobbying CMS to approve new APM models, which will probably be set up in ways favorable to physicians [@Advantedge2015]. These actions have in turn led progressives, patient advocates, and even fiscal conservatives to lament that because the statutory requirements for quality measures are rather sparse, doctors will have a disproportionate influence on the rulemaking process, allowing them to essentially write their own rules [@Kliff2015]. These disgruntled groups' recourse is to go back to Congress and start crying foul play.

Furthermore, use of the APM model as it is likely to be implemented could lead to consolidation in the provider industry, with more physicians joining hospital groups and other large provider groups [@Kutscher2016]. Small physician practices will not be able to succeed in the APM track, and will be stuck with the less desirable MIPS track if they do not consolidate. If they do consolidate, then a more concentrated provider industry will be even more ideally situated to extract concessions from government agencies, to the chagrin of their opposing stakeholders. Either way, no one is going to be happy with the APM track. It was not designed in a way that allows it to satisfy all sides, and that will become even more apparent as details and final rules come forth.

Significant grumbling ensued following a proposed final rule issued by CMS on April 27, 2016 [@cms2016a; @Kuhrt2016]. AMA president Steven Stack seemed satisfied that "CMS has been listening to physicians' concerns" [@Byers2016], but the provider community's response still indicates they are not fully satisfied with the proposed implementation and will likely try to get more concessions. On the other hand, American Hospital Association president Tom Nickels expressed deep disappointment with "CMS's narrow definition of alternative payment models, which could have a chilling effect on providers' ability to experiment with new patient-centered, value-driven payment models" [@Byers2016]. If the hospital industry, which is often much more closely aligned with provider interests and actually could stand to gain from more physicians joining hospital physician groups as described above, can express disappointment over the proposed rule, then budget hawks and patient advocates will certainly not be entirely pleased. If physicians do not end up assuming what budget hawks feel is "more than nominal risk," or if quality of care and truly value-based payments do not increase as much as patient advocates would like, then legislative battles will resume, perhaps with legal challenges as well.

Federal officials took thousands of comments on the proposed rule, mostly from providers and related groups. Among the biggest complaints they received were the inflexibility in the rule and the ambitious timeline for implementation. The final rule, released by CMS on October 14, 2016 [@cms2016b], was predictably more flexible. It allows for varying degrees of compliance with MIPS in 2017, as well as joint reporting by small rural practices. The initial reactions to the final rule from the provider community were mostly positive, but interestingly still included many of the same concerns about flexibility [@Rappleye2016]. The Medical Group Management Association, for example, said, "It's disappointing that flexibility provided for quality reporting in 2017 largely disappears in 2018 and beyond." Unfortunately for those holding this position, there isn't much more flexibility in the statute for CMS to take. Provider groups do not seem to be satisfied without the flexibility to completely opt out of the QPP, a concern they will eventually have to take up with Congress.

### 4.1.3 Pushing MACRA off the Cliff

Even an unstable compromise can last if nothing happens to disrupt the delicate balance. In a political climate prone to violent storms that arise over more trivial policy matters, it is unlikely MACRA will exist in a calm environment. Take, for example, the case of a proposal in an early version of the ACA which would allow doctors to be compensated for consulting with patients about their preferences for end-of-life care. Sarah Palin and others successfully labeled this provision "death panels," which led to the provision being omitted from the bill [@Farber2009]. This major freak-out happened over a policy that would have been inconsequential for the vast majority of Americans, yet it resulted in the policy being changed. The only difference with MACRA is that it is a much more substantial policy than the alleged death panels. If MACRA is implemented as written, it will not just affect a few Medicare patients at the very end of their lives. It will generate significant upheaval in one of the largest industries in the American economy, one that touches virtually everyone in the country. No hyperbole about a government panel recommending euthanization of sick elderly people is necessary to generate controversy around MACRA. It will generate its own controversy. The argument could even be made that because it is so consequential, MACRA deserves vigorous dialogue and considerable vetting in the public sphere. However, MACRA is too unstable as a compromise to avoid being altered significantly in the process of such vetting.

### 4.1.4 An Unstable Compromise

As long as the stakeholders in the argument do not relinquish their positions or realize different interests, there is no scenario under which all sides will be completely happy with the MACRA payment model as it is implemented. My findings on group interests and conflict suggest that the MACRA payment model described above is an unstable compromise because as these groups continue to lobby Congress for changes, legislators will listen and respond. The fight will probably begin anew in the administrative rulemaking arena as MACRA is implemented, but inevitably it will spill back into Congress. SGR has been replaced not by a fix, but by a temporary truce as a new lightning rod for debate is erected.

## 4.2 MACRA's payment model is severable, and therefore politically vulnerable.

If MACRA does not solve the underlying conflict over payment models, how did it pass in the first place? Both chapters 2 and 3 of my dissertation, on the effects of group interests and public opinion, as well research on policy feedbacks [@Oberlander2015; @Campbell2012; @Pierson1993; @Pierson2000], suggest that broad reform packages can gain political support by including proposals different groups will like. Indeed, there is something for everyone in MACRA, or at least enough that the bill has passed without creating any significant backlash from the public or from key stakeholder groups. However, this left the payment model piece vulnerable to future political attack.

MACRA engages in a fair amount of obvious logrolling across issues, stretching its scope far beyond a simple reform of Medicare payment models [see @Congress2015 for a list of the bill's provisions]. Liberals got an extension on CHIP, but not full funding for the reauthorization. Fiscal conservatives got more means-testing of Part B and D premiums and a budget neutrality clause in the new MIPS payment track, but they also had to swallow an additional $141 billion in deficit spending. Doctors got a repeal of the SGR and an opportunity to rework or replace certain onerous and opaque quality measures, but not without putting themselves on the hook for more significant investments in care quality and commitment to value-based payment models with "more than nominal risk." The elderly and patient advocates got rid of the SGR's threats to provider access and higher physician commitment to patient quality, but had to trade away first-dollar Medigap coverage and accept higher premiums for Medicare beneficiaries.[^3]

Many of these provisions are entirely superfluous to the new payment models, but they helped make the bill politically palatable for a wide range of groups. Similar to the young adult coverage provisions in the ACA (described in chapter 3), MACRA's reauthorization of CHIP, for example, is probably widely popular. If a member of Congress is ever challenged on his/ her MACRA vote in a campaign setting, it will be very easy to respond with a statement like "I voted to give health insurance to poor kids and improve care access for our seniors." Such a statement would likely placate all but the most conscientious fiscal conservatives. Conservatives themselves can also honestly say they were supporting responsible Medicare payment reform and voted for the rich to pay their fair share instead of benefiting at the taxpayers' expense. It is no accident that CHIP reauthorization, a ban on first-dollar Medigap coverage, and means-testing for Medicare premiums all ended up in a bill meant ostensibly to deal with the SGR.

Politically, MACRA was a huge success because it successfully brought enough benefits to the groups involved and did not provoke other groups or the general public in any significant way. However, this short-term political success may have come at the expense of enacting a truly permanent solution for Medicare provider payments. The payment model itself is entirely severable from the rest of MACRA. In legal and logistical terms, it could be removed very easily without affecting CHIP, Medigap, means-testing, or any of the more attractive features of the bill. This severability leaves the payment model politically vulnerable despite the widespread support for the bill in which it was passed.

On its own, this vulnerability does not mean MACRA payment models will soon be repealed. However, when considered alongside the instability of the MACRA compromise, we can conclude that the inevitable debates over the new models will probably lead to significant alterations because MACRA does not occupy a defensible position. As long as no significant changes occur in the overall political context that would lock it in place, it seems that MACRA will be subject to many singnificant alterations as it goes into effect. As we will see next, there is no reason to believe that such contextual changes have occurred or will occur to cover MACRA's vulnerability.

## 4.3 MACRA is business as usual.

The only thing that can save MACRA from itself is a meaningful change in the political context. If the balance of group interests' power in Congress shifts away from provider interests, or if certain institutions change dramatically (particularly if stricter budgetary procedures are adopted), MACRA may be shielded from future meaningful debate and allow it to become entrenched as a baseline for future marginal adjustment. However, there is no evidence that the overall political context has changed in a way that would make MACRA a special or unexpected occurrence, nor is there reason to suspect any future changes that would politically lock MACRA in place. Three facts support this point. First, MACRA as a piece of legislation actually looks quite similar to other recent health legislation, including some of the former SGR suspension bills. Second, the dynamics of party competition and congressional responsiveness have not changed significantly in decades and do not appear to be changing, giving stakeholder groups incentives to continue lobbying for their preferred positions. Finally, MACRA does not get the feedbacks right, meaning it will do nothing to prevent future debate over its existence.

### 4.3.1 SGR II

Though MACRA was different than previous temporary doc fix bills in that it permanently repealed SGR rather than merely delaying implementation, the qualitative differences essentially end there. MACRA looks like any other doc fix bill. For example, the 2014 temporary fix was not just a bill to delay SGR implementation. Among other things, it also extended maternal, infant, and early childhood visiting programs enacted previously, delayed the transition of medical coding systems to ICD-10 until October 2015, and amended the ACA to remove limits on deductibles in employer-sponsored plans [@Congress2014]. There was something for everyone in the 2014 bill, a pattern which should sound familiar after the discussion above about logrolling in MACRA. Prior SGR bills show similar patterns. Because no one could agree on exactly what to do with SGR, doing anything required a lot of compromises on irrelevant policies and programs.

Both MACRA and the SGR bills epitomized eleventh-hour brinksmanship. MACRA's passage literally hours before severe SGR rate cuts were scheduled to take effect was by then a very predictable plot twist. Congress had practiced this dangerous maneuver 17 times before. Some SGR suspension bills were even passed after cuts took effect, with the bills undoing the cuts retroactively. This is not simply an amusing sidebar in the history of Medicare payment reform. Rather, it shows quite clearly that Congress could not figure out what to do about this policy no one liked, and that did not change with MACRA. The same maneuvers that led to the temporary suspensions were used to craft the permanent doc fix. Certainly the fact that SGR itself is now gone forever has brought temporary relief, but MACRA is in many respects no different than any other doc fix bill. The only difference is that it replaced SGR with another policy with which no one in Congress will know what to do after implementation begins in earnest.

### 4.3.2 Victory or Truce?

As shown in chapter 1, party competition has been alive and well over the past few decades. Combined with the consensus among political scientists that elite polarization is both real and significant [for a review, see @Hetherington2009], what we have is a recipe for policy instability, especially when the policies are unstable themselves. MACRA does not represent a departure from this trend. Despite the large bipartisan majorities in favor of it, different sides like different things about the bill. In fact, the diversity of support-building handouts in the bill show that legislators are responding very keenly to certain groups. Groups that successfully catch the ears of Congress once will only be emboldened to try again for their cause. MACRA's payment models were not really a victory for anyone, but rather a temporary truce in a larger debate. The findings in chapter 1 give no indication that broader contextual or institutional factors will be changing any time soon, ensuring the truce will end.

Even the surprise election of Donald Trump and a unified Republican government does not change the essential underlying context of the debate. With the dust beginning to settle from the tumultuous 2016 presidential election, it is important to consider whether the election of Donald Trump on a populist, reactionary platform changes any of the conclusions drawn so far about context. Certainly Trump's election spells uncertainty for the health care industry overall, with repeal of the ACA rising to the top of Congress's 2017 agenda. However, the context in which MACRA and Medicare payments reside is not likely to see much change. If anything, Trump's election will only serve to strengthen the position of the budget hawks, who seem to have been put on the disadvantage during the Obama years.

MACRA's passage was a tactical win for doctors in the sense that it relieved them of SGR and all its apocalyptic uncertainty. The medical community came out ahead, even though their victory was far from secure. What Donald Trump's election does is legitimize the budget hawks' position. When the President-elect of the United States threatens to cancel Boeing's contract for Air Force One, citing cost, budget hawks on congressional health committees will be emboldened to take similarly austere stances toward Medicare payments. They will continue to have significant opposition from providers and progressives, so it is unlikely that something like SGR will return in the near-future, but when doctors come back to Congress asking for more budget authorizations for QPP, congressional Republicans will likely say "no." Physicians are unlikely to take "no" for an answer when their livelihoods are on the line, and thus the conflict will continue.

One important feature of the politics surrounding MACRA which has been solidified rather than altered by the 2016 election is the partisan polarization in Congress. Since Election Day, the Democrats have largely doubled down on their prior positions, with many vowing to fight the efforts of a unified Republican government to significantly alter Medicare and other programs. Given all the powerful groups that have such high stakes in Medicare, they are likely to put up a good fight as far as payment models go.

It is also worth noting that Trump's pick to lead the Department of Health and Human Services, Rep. Tom Price (R-GA), has at times come out against various alternative payment models, such as bundled payments. As a medical doctor himself, he is a staunch advocate of providers' views on payment. The Trump election legitimizes the position of the budget hawks in general, but his pick of Tom Price paradoxically also strengthens the hands of providers. On the issue of provider payments, expect to see these camps come into direct conflict.

### 4.3.3 Feedback Effects

Had MACRA been crafted differently, it may have been able to engineer its own long-term support. This kind of feedback effect helped make the Medicare program one of the most firmly entrenched social policies in America just a few years after its passage in 1965. After years of intense opposition, Medicare passed on a huge wave of support for liberal Democrats in the 1964 election, a wave without which Medicare might not have been able to make it ashore [@Starr1982; @Oberlander2003]. Doctors themselves, previously vehement opponents of a massive government intrusion into their livelihood, quickly changed their opinions of the program in part because it became one of their most important revenue sources [@Colombotos1969b]. In the half-century since its passage, Medicare has generally been viewed by all sides as a baseline policy from which marginal adjustments will be made (witness the rise of Medicare Advantage, the Part D prescription Drug benefit, etc.), rather than being itself an object of existential debate.

Part of this successful consolidation around Medicare was the way it was designed and implemented. Policy feedback research attests that Medicare got the feedbacks right in many important ways [@Oberlander2015; @Campbell2011]. Medicare catalyzed its own political support by quickly building a supportive constituency for the program itself that consisted of players on both sides of the pre-passage debates. Implementation also went smoothly, denying would-be opponents any opportunities to call for writing the program off as an administrative failure.

MACRA has none of these advantages. As discussed above, the MACRA compromise is both unstable and politically vulnerable. It simply was not designed to avoid significant debate over its major provisions. As the various groups resume their battle positions, the coalition of support around the payment models in MACRA will be severely challenged. Doctors will want quality measures with no bite and higher reimbursements. Patient advocates and budget hawks will attempt to move the dial the other way. Neither side will be happy with the way the program is implemented. MACRA, like SGR before it, will be caught in the middle of the debate.

## 4.4 MACRA will not endure as passed.

MACRA is not a permanent resolution of the debates over Medicare payment models. The new model is itself an unstable compromise that is severable from the more favorable elements of the bill and not likely to be saved by changes in political context, whether exogenous or self-induced. MACRA has effected a temporary truce by delaying implementation of the new model for a few more years, but providers, policy makers, and other stakeholders in the debate can expect to be back in the trenches of this war before too long.

What would a permanent solution look like? While my research cannot prescribe such a policy in detail, I can comment on three political factors required for a successful, permanent resolution. First, there almost certainly needs to be a realignment of stakeholder interests. This realignment could be induced by a new policy, as occurred when Medicare implementation led doctors to rethink their opposition to the new cash cow, or it could occur exogenously as factors realign and savvy policy entrepreneurs [see @Kingdon1995] exploit an opportunity to solidify any temporary consensus on what should be done. For example, if budget hawks are able to generate budget surpluses without changing Medicare, that would be a good time to address Medicare payment models with the budgetary constraints and time pressures at least temporarily removed. Even if the surpluses disappear, a policy could be designed and implemented during the window of opportunity that consolidates political support and becomes the new baseline for marginal changes.

Second, a lasting compromise policy will need to be able to stand on its own without making extraneous compromises. Such compromises only serve to pass a bill, and do nothing politically for the new program during implementation. To the extent that compromise occurs, it should occur within the payment model itself, or the compromise will be a sham. All the relevant stakeholders need to have a reason to support the compromise, not just the bill, and that support needs to last not just until the President signs it but also after CMS issues final rules.

Third, there may need to be a significant reframing of the issue for the broader public. The public, to the extent they know about this issue at all, currently understands it in terms of access to physicians. This is evidenced by the way MACRA was titled: it is an Act dealing with Medicare *Access* and CHIP Reauthorization. That puts the public firmly, if often unknowingly, on the side of "their doctors," as the AMA so often phrases it. With the public sidelined in this manner, stakeholder groups are free to continue their squabbling largely out of the public eye. Contrast this with the debate over the original SGR enactment, which came as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and was framed only as an attempt to make the federal government more fiscally responsible. With party competition now as fierce as ever in Medicare's history, overall public opinion is a significant factor in congressional policymaking (see chapter 1). If the public sent clear enough signals to elected officials that they wanted something specific done, elected officials would have almost no choice but to listen, whatever the organized stakeholders thought.[^4] In fact, an arousal of public opinion could effect (or at least be effected by) a realignment of group interests along the lines of my first point above.

# References


[^1]: Given SGR’s significant budget cuts, almost any conceivable fix would end up increasing Medicare expenses dramatically on paper, even though the fact SGR was never implemented means it likely did not have much actual effect.

[^2]: For a description of the MACRA bill, see the official bill summary [@Congress2015]. For more details on MACRA's payment models, see @cmsnd and @Cragun2015. For more information on the APM track specifically, see @Wynne2016. The discussion about MACRA's specifics draws on these sources, as well as conversations with experts and others familiar with MACRA's drafting and passage.

[^3]: In addition to the means-testing provisions of MACRA, which would only affect a very small portion of Medicare beneficiaries [@Cubanski2015], the SGR would have indirectly held down Medicare premiums by keeping program costs down. Part B and D premiums are tied to these program costs, with all beneficiaries paying at least 25% of their share of the average cost.

[^4]: We are seeing just such a scenario with the GOP's recent actions on repealing the ACA. While public opinion on this policy is not well understood beyond a superficial level (see chapter 3), it can be said with certainty that there is significant opposition to its major provisions, and the 2016 election outcome has lent significant validation to the Republican position on the issue.