# Conclusion

## Pulling the Factors Together

In a concluding section of the dissertation, I may (if time allows) pull together some thoughts and/ or rudimentary analyses of how the factors analyzed separately in the three chapters might interact in reality. Parsimoniuous models are important for isolating specific factors and mechanisms that are important in complex processes, but drawing implications for the real world often requires reintroduction of real-world complexity. I have no thoughts on specific interactions at this point, but perhaps ideas along these lines will materialize in the process of conducting my analyses. These ideas could suggest fruitful avenues for further research, which I would also detail in the concluding section of the dissertation.

## To-dos

For chapter 1, I need to further develop the theoretical framework on which the hypotheses about representation by whole legislatures rest. The issue is that if the hypothesis about individual legislators is correct, then over time, legislatures will become filled with perfectly responsive legislators who always win election by catering to their median constituents. Such hyper-responsiveness at the level of the individual legislator will prevent parties from governing as cohesive units, according to the theory of conditional party government. This would in turn destroy the party's label, effectively removing any meaningful party competition. This would lead to decreases in party competition causing *more* representative actions by whole legislatures, rather than less as hypothesized. I plan to develop the body of theory on parties further by creating a formal model of parties' candidate selection processes. The outcome of the model, as far as I can tell, is parties that compete well in elections across districts with a broad range of median opinions, but not to the extent that party labels become meaningless. This theoretical development will probably take the form of a separate paper, which will be preliminary to the study on party competition in chapter 1.

I also need to refine my measure(s) of party competition. I have a general idea of what to look for, but there are still many specifics to nail down. These include which elections to use in the measures, how many election years (lags, if you will) to use in the measure of party competition at each point in time, and whether alternative measures based on party financial support are feasible. I plan to use multiple measures in the analysis in order to provide more robust conclusions.

The main items left to address in chapters 2 and 3 are also data-related. In order to conduct the proposed analyses, I need to assess exactly what data I have in terms of issue publics, public opinion, and elite preferences. As with my party competition measures for chapter 1, there are many possible ways to form my measures for these two chapters. I plan to use as many as seem appropriate to test the hypotheses as thoroughly as possible.

## Tentative Timeline

The bulk of this project will involve pulling together various data sources and obtaining datasets suitable for the various proposed analyses. I hope to spend the spring and summer of 2016 doing this, as well as developing and writing the theoretical background paper for chapter 1 mentioned above. This will probably spill into Fall semester 2016, but I hope to finish conducting my first analyses by the end of that semester. Spring semester 2017 will then be devoted to writing and to refining the analyses as needed, based on feedback from the committee and others. At this point, I intend to send regular preliminary drafts of chapters to the committee. Ideally, the conceptual frameworks developed in this prospectus can be used (with edits as suggested before and during the Preliminary Exam) can be used in the actual dissertation chapters, meaning only the analyses and conclusions will be "new" to the committee during the write-up phase. This will leave the 2017-2018 academic year, my fifth year in residence, as an "overflow" period in case the project takes longer than expected, as well as for remaining items (editing, formatting, etc) and for job-search related activities.
