# 1. Party Competition and Electoral Accountability

In modern democratic nations, political parties are a common, even universal institutional feature of government. Political scientists have argued for decades that democracy is "unthinkable" [@Schattschneider1942] or "unworkable" [@Aldrich2011; @Aldrich2010] without parties. Parties, these scholars claim, are an important mechanism through which voters can hold their elected representatives accountable, a key feature of democratic government. In other words, in order for democratic representation to occur, strong political parties that compete meaningfully with each other for the right to enact clear, distinct platforms are essential.

However, this ideal of responsible party government, as it is called in political science, has not been consistently realized in American history. During a period of almost uninterrupted Democratic control of Congress from the 1950s through 1995, the strength of America's two major political parties was thought by many observers to be in decline [@Wattenberg1990; @Aldrich2011], and electoral accountability seemed to have disappeared as a result [@Fiorina1980]. At least part of this decline in accountability is attributable to the inability of the Republican Party to compete meaningfully in the "Solid South," which effectively functioned as a one-party system during this era. Since 1980, however, as the Republican Party has made significant inroads in the South, the responsiveness of members of Congress to public opinon has increased significantly in that region [@AldrichForth], in turn making Congress more responsive overall. In short, scholars argue that without strong parties, citizens may not have any way to hold elected officials accountable for their actions, and those elected officials will have less incentive and ability to listen to their constituents.

How have changes in party competition affected electoral accountability and responsiveness to public opinion in the US? @AldrichForth provide initial evidence that responsiveness has increased along with party competition since the 1980s. In this chapter, I propose to conduct further tests of this hypothesis. In addition, I will take this analysis a step further by examining whether the policies (specifically, adopted bills) that emerge during periods of greater party competition are more representative of preferences overall. I expect to find that increased party competition does indeed lead to increased responsiveness to public opinion, both at the level of the individual legislator and at the aggregate level, as well as increased mass participation in politics. By empirically supporting this link between political institutions and electoral accountability, this research will increase our understanding of the role political parties play in democratic government. Despite over a century of scholarship on parties [@Ranney1975; @Epstein1986], we are just now beginning to make this link [@Aldrich2010], and further empirical testing is in order. The analyses I perform will also yield insights into how we can make government more responsive to public preferences, insofar as such responsiveness is desireable.

Another contribution this paper will make to research on party competition is a new index measure of party competition, based entirely on election results. There are already many indices of party competition, some of which I describe and use in my analyses below. However, all indices are based on important assumptions and may be limited by data availability at the time they are developed. My proposed index offers two potential improvements over previous indices. First, most indices are not developed with national politics or policymaking in mind, but rather as an attempt to examine the partisan profile of states. My index is designed to be used at a national level as an independent variable that might affect other things, like Congressional policy making. Second, past indices have not always made use of data on down-ballot elections, such as those for attorney general or state legislature. I intend to collect as much data as possible on these elections in order to consider all possible aspects of electoral competition between parties.

## Background

Political parties are institutions that organize both electoral and legislative politics. Political parties are most often viewed as a creation of elite politicians as aids in the realization of their personal political goals [@Aldrich2011]. One fundamental goal of politicians in a democracy is to win election to government office [@Mayhew1974; @Fenno1973]. This is not necessarily their only goal, however, as those who seek office generally seek it as a means to some end, rather than as an end in itself [@Aldrich2001]. Thus, parties serve not merely as vehicles for winning election and ensuring reelection through enactment of party platforms, but also as ongoing purveyors of specific policy goals. In these roles, parties attract benefit-seeking activists in addition to candidates [@Aldrich1983], and it is these activists who provide much of the resources and support for the party's candidates [@Aldrich2011; @Aldrich2010]. The set of all parties in a given nation comprise the party system.

In legislative bodies like the US Congress, parties provide structure to the legislative process beyond that prescribed by formal constitutional institutions. Parties also provide great flexibility for groups of legislators to change the way legislative business is conducted from time to time, depending on the needs and circumstances of the party. However, this flexibility also means that the majority party will not always govern as a cohesive unit enacting an ideologically coherent platform and overruling the minority party's goals and opinions. According to the conditional party government model (CPG; see @Aldrich2001), legislative parties will act cohesively when there is more ideological consistency within the party (especially the majority) and less overlap across parties. During the decades of Democratic control of Congress starting in the 1950s, it was not until around 1980 that Democrats began to "rule" in any meaningful sense. This development followed significant reforms within the majority party that took power from the committee chairs (mostly Southern conservatives) and gave it to chamber leaders who would be more in tune with the views of more orthodox liberal Democrats [@Rohde1991; @Aldrich2001]. According to CPG, this occured because the Democratic party became more consistently liberal, Republicans more consistently conservative, and the level of overlap and cooperation between the two decreased.

While parties are created by elites to serve elite purposes, they may also provide for political accountability of elected officials to the voters, an important element of any functioning democracy. However, the act of voting has multiple purposes, and therefore may be a somewhat ambiguous signal for politicians. On one hand is the prospective or mandate model of voting, in which voters give their votes to the candidate who espouses their most preferred policy platform, and the winning candidate is elected with the understanding that he/ she will proceed to enact the platform on which he/ she ran. Many influential theories of representation, such as the median voter model of @Downs1957, are based on this concept of voting. This model preserves the meaningfulness of substantive policy proposals in campaigns, but does not provide for any enforcement of the electoral mandate once the candidate is installed in office [@Manin1999].

On the other hand is the retrospective or accountability model of voting, which posits that voters will vote for the incumbents if they have performed well in office or if good conditions around election time are attributed to the incumbents. If conditions are bad and voters think the incumbent government is to blame, they will vote for the challengers and "throw the rascals out" [@Stokes1996; @Manin1999]. While this model induces representation of the public by elected officials when the public has complete information, it fails to do so when information is less complete. @Manin1999 suggest that voters may actually use their votes in both ways, and that it is rational to do so, but with the result that governments may be somewhat less accountable when such dual-purpose voting is employed. Thus, we might expect parties to be somewhat responsive to the public, but not completely so. Other institutions affect the level of accountability a governing party faces in future elections.

One such institution is elections. There is a long-running debate in political science on the marginality hypothesis, which essentially states that elected officials are more responsive to public opinion when elections are competitive. The debate has produced a large body of work both supporting [@Ansolabehere2001; @Griffin2006] and refuting [@Fiorina1973; @Gerber1995; @Groseclose2001] this prediction. However, as @Aldrich2010 point out, studies along these lines do not generally measure *party* competition. Incumbent candidates in one-party systems may occasionally face strong challengers, and intra-party factional struggles may break out temporarily, but the incumbent party will not face any strong competition. This is important because the retrospective voting (voting based on the incumbent party's record in office) on which electoral accountability is based [@Downs1957; @Manin1999; @Aldrich2010] requires a strong alternative party that can serve as a real choice for dissatisfied voters. Individual politicians and non-partisan factions do not face the same incentives parties face, because they do not recruit candidates and have no need to cultivate an inclusive group brand that is favorable to a majority of voters across both time and place. These non-partisan actors, therefore, will not be as sensitive to electoral pressures as parties.

What the marginality studies have been missing is the fact that accountability comes not from electoral competition in general, but rather from competition between parties in particular. Individual elected officials, therefore, will be more accountable to voters when the party brand with which they have chosen to affiliate is challenged by a candudate with a somewhat equally competitive and significantly different party brand that offers voters a real choice. In an election in which this condition obtains, we might expect representatives ultimately elected and reelected under these conditions to be more responsive to public opinion. From this prior work, we might modify the marginality hypothesis to predict that individual legislators' responsiveness to their constituents' opinion will increase as party competition increases.

Some of this responsiveness may come as a result of changes in party control of the government, rather than changes in the public views and behavior of individual representatives. Past research has shown that legislators tend to "die with their ideological boots on", and that overall ideological change in policy happens more through replacement of old legislators with new, more representative ones than through conversion or evolution of legislator views and behaviors [@Poole1997; @Poole2007]. This explains the recently observed pattern of "leap-frog representation," whereby the ideal points of a district's representatives change wildly about a district median that does change as much, but enough to defeat an incumbent in favor of the other party's candidate [@Bafumi2010]. Still, there are some factors that may lead individual members of Congress to be more (or less) responsive [@Ensley2013]. Party competition could be one of these. To ensure an unbiased test of that hypothesis, however, it is necessary to control for other factors that might affect ideology and also be related to party competition. These could include changes in district composition [@Crespin2010], time in office [@Stratmann2000; @Ensley2009], and personal legislator characteristics such as age, gender, race, and religion [@Burden2004].

Despite the prediction about individual legislator behavior, it is still not clear that greater party competition will lead to greater policy responsiveness on the whole, i.e. at the level of the legislature rather than the legislator. For a party to compete meaningfully in a given election, it must field strong candidates who have a real chance of winning. This means candidates so fielded must be sensitive to what the voters want. However, the party also needs to present a clear choice to voters in order for the party label to have any meaning. Parties need to be sufficiently distinct from each other in order to convey meaningful information to the voters.

This tension might also be thought of as a tension between a party's "establishment" leaders, who want to win elections and seek to recruit candidates who can win, and the activist wing of a party, which is more concerned with keeping the party's brand "pure" and making sure candidates and elected officials do not betray the party platform. Without the activists, parties would nominate candidates they thought would win, and parties would essentially converge on the median voter in each district (as predicted by @Downs1957), become ideologically spread out across the country according to  ideological differences across districts, and cease to provide meaningful information about any particular candidate's ideological views. In the long run, party competition in any meaningful sense would break down. Parties would compete in every district, but would not compete as parties with any clear agenda or platform.

On the other hand, without the establishment, activists would only nominate their ideological favorites, leading to national convergence of elected officials to the two party medians (as set by the activists, see @Aldrich1983 for a description of these dynamics), but no district-level convergence on the district medians. This would result in very distinct parties, but ones that are not competitive in any but a few districts in the ideological center of the country. Once again, party competition breaks down, as parties do not compete meaningfully in most districts.

The ongoing struggle between what I am calling the establishment and the activists, however, leaves some middle ground for parties to be electorally competitive in more districts than if the activists had their way, but also to preserve their distinct ideological positions. This dynamic allows for more individual responsiveness through the dynamics of party competition described above. Based on the CPG model, it also provides better conditions for maintenance of cohesive parties and therefore greater responsiveness of governments in general. Based on this additional research, we can reasonably predict that party competition will not only increase the responsiveness of individual legislators, but also that legislatures as a whole will become more responsive to public opinion in terms of the bills they pass.

Two other findings in the literature can also be tested further by this project. First, the effects of party competition may change over time, as the party system itself changes. @AldrichForth show that parties in the American South have only become competitive in the past two or three decades, which they also show is related to a rise in responsiveness of Southern legislators. Second, it may be the case that different parties respond differently to party competition. @Clinton2006 finds interesting qualitative differences in the responsiveness of Republicans compared to Democrats. I will run simple tests of these hypotheses using my own data.

With the feasibility of my hypotheses established based on prior research, I turn now to a description of my proposed tests, including a description of the new index I developed for this project.

## Methods

My first hypothesis for this chapter is that increased party competition will affect an elected official's responsiveness to his/ her constituents' opinions. To be more operationally specific, higher measures of party competition in a state will be associated with a stronger positive correlation between the ideology/ legislative behaviors of members of the US Congress and the ideology/ opinions of their constituents (state opinion for Senators, district opinion for House members). Using data on legislators who hold office $o$ (Senate and each House race are given unique values of $o$) in state $s$ at time $t$, I will construct the following OLS regression model to test my hypothesis:

$$
Legislator\ Ideology_{ost} = \beta_0 + \beta_1 Constituent\ Ideology_{ost} + \beta_2 Party\ Competition_{ost} + \beta_3 (Constituent\ Ideology_{ost} * Party\ Competition_{ost}) + \beta_4 (other\ controls) + \alpha_t + \epsilon_{ost}
$$

Generally, representation is measured in the manner represented by $\beta_1$, which is the correlation between legislator ideology and constituent ideology. The coefficient of interest for this chapter is the interaction term, $\beta_3$, which can be interpreted as the effect of party competition on representation (holding constituent opinion and other variables constant). If we define representation itself as the change in legislator ideology with respect to changes in constituent ideology, we can take the partial derivative of the equation above with respect to constituent ideology to obtain a stylized representation function showing that representation varies with the level of party competition:

$$
\frac{\partial (Legislator\ Ideology_{ost})}{\partial (Constituent\ Ideology_{ost})} = \beta_1 + \beta_3 Party\ Competition_{ost}
$$

As noted in the first equation, I will include various controls to produce less biased results. Electoral competition could be related to the variables of interest, so I will include the margin of victory for each winning candidate in the model. I will also use data on personal characteristics of the legislator, such as gender, race, age, time in office, etc. Party and geographic region will also be controlled for using indicator variables, and I will include year-fixed effects to account for changes over time.

Given the coding of my measures (to be discussed below), a significant, positive $\beta_3$ will provide support for my hypothesis that party competition affects representation. I will obtain estimates of $\beta_3$ by estimating the first equation above. I will also estimate similar models that look at different aspects of the relationship between representation and party competition. To examine the time-varying effects of party competition, I will estimate equation 1 separately for each election cycle $t$ (omitting, of course, the year fixed effects $\alpha_t$). I will also explore models by incumbent party to assess any qualitative differences across parties in representational behaviors.

Testing the second hypothesis about responsiveness of the legislature as a whole will require some aggregation of party competition and public opinion measures, probably an average of district/ state averages. Rather than individual legislative behavior, I will predict actions taken by the legislature as a whole. The most obvious of these is whether or not a bill was passed (regardless of whether it was signed by the President). Other possible dependent variables could be budget appropriations, introduction of certain types of bills, and committee hearings on a topic. I could also test for differences in the responsiveness of the two chambers separately, which might be an intersting qualitative look at the effects of legislative institutions on representation. Depending on how much data I have available, I may only be able to provide descriptive statistics related to this hypothesis.

### Instrumental Variable Approach

**[Still working on this one conceptually]**

## Data and Measurement of Key Variables

In order to estimate the model given above, I will need measures of legislator ideology, constituent ideology, and party competition. My strategy in general will be to run multiple specifications of my models, using many different measures of the variables of interest, in order to increase confidence that my results are not driven by the assumptions of any single measure. I will usa data from 1870 to 2015 to avoid the complex issues caused by the rise of the Republican Party and the Civil War.

### Party Competition

One contribution of this project is deeper examination of state-level party competition on national policymaking in Congress, following the lead of @AldrichForth. Thus, it is important to think seriously about whether indices designed to examine state-level policy making are appropriate for use here. Therefore, I have developed a new party competition index meant to capture exactly the kind of party competition that matters for congressional policy makers. State-level measures are the right level for party competition, because the major political parties are organized in states. Indeed, the only nationally-elected officials in the US are the President and Vice-President. Members of the House and Senate are elected by voters in their states, and they face challenges from other politicians in their states. Candidates for federal office often come up through the ranks of state government, and are therefore direct products of the state parties rather than of a national party organization. Assessing the state parties' ability to attract votes at the state level is key to understanding party competition in America. 

With this in mind, my proposed index will be calculated as follows. I will use two-party general election results for each legislative and executive branch office up for election in a given year, excluding presidential elections. This includes both statewide offices like governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, and secretary of state (where these executive offices are elected and where data on these races are available), as well as members of the state's lower and upper legislative chambers and representatives in both Congressional chambers.[^1] I will sum, for all races included in the index, the raw Democratic vote total, and divide by the sum of the two-party vote totals (Republicans plus Democrats) to obtain a percentage of major party votes captured by the Democrats. I will calculate this index by office $o$ in state $s$ at time $t$, excluding the office for which the index is being calculated from both the numerator and denominator. For example, when calculating an index for party competition for Alabama's first congressional district (AL-1) in 2014, I will use data from all elections held in Alabama that election cycle *except* the results from district AL-1. Mathematically, the index calculations so far can be written as:

$$
Democratic\ Competition_{o_nst} = \frac{\sum_{o|o\neq o_n}^{}Democratic\ Votes_{ost}}{\sum_{o|o\neq o_n}^{}Total\ Two\ Party\ Vote_{ost}}
$$

When this measure equals 1, Democrats are running uncontested in the state. Republicans are uncontested when the measure is 0. At an index value of 0.5, the two major parties are locked in perfect competition. To obtain a unidimensional measure of party competition, I will fold the results obtained above using the expression $1 - |Democratic\ Competition_{o_nst} - 0.5|$. This will yield an index that ranges from 0.5 (one-party dominance) to 1 (perfect party competition).

This single-period index value will be sensitive to idiosyncratic variation in state-level party competition across election years, including variation due to the offices on the ballot that year. For some purposes, this sensitivity to statewide variation is useful. To yield a more stable, long-term view of a state's party competition, I could average current and lagged values of the index in each state, as is frequently done with the Ranney index. A 4- or 6-year average, for example, would ensure the inclusion of a gubernatorial election and at least one US Senate election in every year's index value. Even the single-year measure will not be as sensitive to candidate effects in any particular race, since many different races are accounted for in the index (as many as are up for election in the state that year). In particular, this is useful in that it mitigates the effects of popular/ well-known candidates for high-profile offices like governor or US Senator. The measure also avoids some, if not all, of the effects of legislative and congressional redistricting, since the index does not depend in any way on district definitions.[^2]

There are many existing measures of party competition in the literature [e.g. @Ranney1976; @Holbrook1993; @Ceaser2005]. The problem I see with existing measures for my purposes[^2] is that all were developed for analysis of the effects of party competition in a state on state-level policy. Many use control of state government, which although correlated with election outcomes, is not quite the same as electoral competition. Many indices do not include national election data. Those that do often include presidential vote, which I do not feel is appropriate for two reasons. First, presidential elections are unique in that they are nationally-oriented. Presidential votes are often cast with national considerations in mind, rather than particular state interests. The phenomenon of Southern Democratic supremacy at the the state and congressional levels, even as Southern states voted overwhelmingly for Republican presidential candidates, illustrates this point nicely. The second reason, particular to this study, is that I plan to use presidential vote share as a measure of state/ district ideology, as is often done in other studies at the national level, and it is therefore inappropriate to include presidential vote in the party competition measure as well. To assess robustness of my results to different measures of party competition, I plan to estimate alternate specifications of my models using three indices, which represent a good sample of all the available indices: the Ranney Index [@Ranney1976], the Holbrook and Van Dunk index [HVD; @Holbrook1993], and Ceaser and Saldin's [-@Ceaser2005] Major Party Competition index.

### Legislator Ideology

For the dependent variable, I plan to use existing measures of representative ideology. I will probably rely mostly on the roll call-based DW-NOMINATE scores [@Carroll2015; @Carroll2009]. These scores are available for all Congresses back to 1789, and are commonly used in scholarly research on Congress. However, many objections to the use of roll call votes as measures of legislator ideology have been raised, so I will supplement my analysis with alternative model specifications that use other measures, such as Bonica's campaign finance scores [-@Bonica2014]. I may also estimate a model for state legislators using Shor and McCarty's survey-based NPAT scores for state legislatures [-@Shor2011]. In all cases, I will translate the measures so that lower values represent conservative legislators, and higher values represent liberal legislators.

### Constituent Ideology

The most commonly used measure of constituent ideology in studies of American politics is two-party presidential vote share in the state or congressional district [e.g. @AldrichForth; @Griffin2006]. I will use the Democratic share of the vote in the most recent presidential election for the year in question. For presidential elections back to 1992, data on the vote by congressional district is available. Before that time, I will need to use county-level data mapped onto congressional districts. I am still trying to figure out how to accomplish this, but I believe I am close. I have the county-level data and GIS boundary definition files for counties and congressional districts. My biggest obstacle at this point is deciding how to handle the many counties that are part of multiple congressional districts. I will look at past work, such as @Ansolabehere2001, for ideas.

Presidential vote share, like DW-NOMINATE scores, has the advantages of being readily available for long periods of time and being widely used in political science research. However, there are also known issues with this measure [@Kernell2009]. Steps can be taken to mitigate some of the issues, such as demeaning by year to obtain a measure that is comparable across years, but this still does not solve all the measurement problems. Where possible, I will again supplement my analyses with alternative measures of constituent ideology. I could use survey data from large-N surveys such as the Cooperative Congressional Election Study and the National Annenberg Election Study (both of which are publicly accessible) and multi-level regression/ post-stratification measures, such as those created by Tausanovitch and Warshaw [-@Tausanovitch2013].

I also have access to a dataset containing estimates of legislator and constituent ideology on the same scale, which allows for a direct measure of the ideological distance between legislators and their constituents. These estimates, calculated by @Xing2014, would allow me to estimate a model that looks more like the second equation given above, with additional control variables added. This data is only available for the 111th Congress, but using it would allow for yet another robustness check on my results from other specifications.

# References

[^1]: For states that hold odd-year elections for state offices, I will combine these elections with the next even-year federal election. Unfortunately, election data before the 1950's (other than federal and gubernatorial) are not generally available. For elections in that time frame, I will still be able to calculate a party competition measure using what limited data are available. I will obviously want to be sure the composition of the index over time is not driving any results I generate using this index.

[^2]: Of course, there may still be some effects of redistricting. Competitive districts may have higher turnout, leading to different voting patterns than would otherwise be observed. On the other hand, a district that is not supportive enough for one party may not be contested by that party, leaving all major party votes to the dominant party, when that may not have been the case if there were a challenger. However, these forces will generally be indicative of the level of party competitiveness of the state as a whole, exactly what the index is trying to capture.
