# 3. Public Opinion Signals

In democratic theory, public opinion is often seen as a prime mover of policy, but public opinion in reality is not always directly translated into policy. It seems, however, that certain characteristics of public opinion might influence policy makers to pay more attention to the public, at least on some issues. If we think of public opinion as a signal, then we might expect the nature of the signal itself may affect its reception. Politicians may not receive or be unable to interpret noisy signals from the public, and may even exploit such opportunities to act more independently of their constituents. In discussing public opinion as a signal, it will be useful to discuss a few relevant characteristics individually, namely valence, stability, and salience. Other classifications or terms may be better suited for other purposes, and this list is not necessarily exhaustive of all the characteristics of public opinion, but these four characteristics are each relevant to representation of public opinion.

## Valence

Valence refers to directionality, and is probably what most people have in mind when they talk about "public opinion." The public may favor one policy or one elected official over another. Alternatively, the public may approve or disapprove of a policy maker, policymaking body, or specific policy. Whether considered in unidimensional or multidimensional terms, we can speak of public opinion taking (or failing to take) a certain valence, or position regarding the opinion object.

If the public generally agrees on a clear departure from the status quo, then the valence of public opinion is quite clear. In these cases, politicians will generally receive a strong signal that they should act in a certain way. However, if aggregate public opinion on an issue takes a more moderate valence, then the signals politicians receive become more ambiguous. A moderate valence can be produced either by many people holding truly moderate opinions or by sizable, relatively equally sized groups having opinions at both extremes. The latter case fits the definition of polarization, a subject of considerable debate in political science.

There is very little argument over the reality of elite polarization, but scholars disagree on whether the public has become similarly divided. Some claim that the public is divided "closely," not "deeply," meaning most people hold politically moderate views and thus are not truly polarized [@Fiorina2006; @Fiorina2008]. However, evidence of increasingly extreme opinions in the ideological wings of both major parties and increasing social cleavages leads other scholars to describe the public as quite polarized [@Abramowitz2008].

The picture of mass polarization becomes even more complicated when ambivalence and multidimensionality are thrown into the mix. Prominent public opinion research shows that people are often not genuinely moderate in their opinions, but hold competing considerations on particular issues [@Zaller1992a; @Zaller1992b; @Hochschild1981]. This means the public could be induced to support either side of a policy debate if politicians seek to sway public opinion through "crafted talk" [@Jacobs2000]. In addition, the public does not seem to adhere to a strictly unidimensional ideology [@Treier2009], and may even be completely "innocent of ideology" [@Converse1964]. Other evidence suggests that non-elite citizens tend to "morselize" their views on issues, thinking about issues in distinct ways that do not necessarily apply the same considerations or ways of thinking consistently [@Kinder1983; @Lane1962]. Thus, we cannot necessarily speak of aggregate moderation as people genuinely taking a moderate position, when perhaps the moderation is only an overall average of ambivalent individual-level opinions.

The debate over polarization, the existence of multiple unrelated dimensions in public opinion, and simultaneous support for competing considerations makes a complete and accurate assessment of the valence of public opinion very difficult, highlighting the noisiness of signals being sent to policy makers. Political scientists and others will continue to examine the microfoundations of public opinion in an attempt to settle the polarization question, but politicians are unlikely to conduct such thorough analysis. Kingdon reports claims by policy makers themselves that they are able to sense public opinion, at least roughly [@Kingdon1995], but this is only an ability to discern valence at a very high level, without much nuance or sophistication. Later models of party identification also suggest that partisanship is based on evaluations of the various political parties [@Fiorina1984; @Johnston2006], implying that an aggregate measure of partisanship might provide useful signals of public opinion at a very general level [@MacKuen1989]. However, neither partisanship nor elites' gut-level sense of public opinion can fully capture the valence of public opinion on every issue. There is thus no reason to think politicians understand or generally care why public opinion takes the valence they perceive. Politicians are therefore receiving noisy signals from the public, rendering them less likely and less able to respond directly to public opinion when aggregate public opinon is moderate and especially when it is moderate and polarized.

Analytically, we can define moderation as being in favor of the status quo. When the valence of public opinion is strongly in favor of a shift from the status quo, politicians will be more likely to go along with that because such a clear signal has electoral implications. If, however, public opinion is polarized in such a way that half favor a significant shift from the status quo in one direction, while the other half favor a significant shift in the opposite direction, elected officials will be less responsive to aggregate public opinion in setting policy. The aggregate in this latter case is moderate on average, but politicians can pick one side and still say they are representing "the public." Which side they choose will depend on other factors, but we can still hypothesize on a first order that opinion in favor of the status quo on average but with high variance will elicit less representative actions from elected officials.

## Stability

Stability, another characteristic of public opinion, refers to the processes by which opinion changes or does not change. In talking about stability, I mean not only whether public opinion changes or not, but also how it changes. Does public opinion follow a path of only minor, incremental changes, or does it tend to fluctuate wildly from one extreme to another? Does it change predictably, or is the change random and unpredictable? As with valence, the stability of public opinion affects the clarity of the signals public officials receive from the public. In addition, stability or lack thereof has implications for the mobilization and malleability of public opinion.

Various theories of public opinion yield different conclusions regarding stability. The classic view of "crystallized opinions" essentially models public opinion as an aggregation of stable, preexisting mental constructs in each individual's mind, as reported to a pollster [@Converse1964; @Kinder1983; @Kinder1998]. When a person is asked his/ her opinion of the president or the death penalty or the state of the health care system, he/ she retrieves the relevant opinion construct from memory and reports its value to the pollster. One implication of the crystallized opinions model, along with the cognitive constraints of the human mind, is that opinions on one issue will be correlated with opinions on other issues [@Kinder1983]. Ideological constraint, based on the ideological frameworks given by political elites, help people know "what goes with what," as @Converse1964 puts it. This kind of stability in opinions would make for very strong signals from the people to their elected officials.

In 1964, Philip Converse published a withering critique of the crystallized opinions model, based on evidence of significant instability in public opinion [see also @Kinder1983]. Converse found that most Americans were not ideologically constrained in their political beliefs. Their opinions on one issue did not correspond with opinions on other issues. Converse also found that attitudes were highly unstable over time, and not in ways that would indicate any kind of constraint or crystallized attitude. Converse concludes that the public holds no stable "crystallized opinions," but rather relies on group memberships and imperfect understandings of the issues. This means that instead of stable, clear signals, politicians are getting only meaningless noise from public opinion.

Converse's [-@Converse1964] powerful critique of the crystallized attitudes model left public opinion scholars deeply divided over the issue of whether attitudes can be treated as preexisting constructs or not. The memory-based model, which John Zaller also calls the Receive-Accept-Sample (RAS) model [@Zaller1992a; @Zaller1992b], attempts to explain the observed instability and inconsistency of public opinion. When citizens receive a message, they choose whether or not to accept that message. If accepted, the information becomes a "consideration," and is placed in memory for later use. Considerations are stored in a sort of mental pile, with more recently processed considerations on top of the pile being more accessible. When asked a question, a person conducts a quick search of his/ her mental pile for relevant considerations. This search has a stochastic element, but is also affected by the relative accessibility of considerations in memory. This is generally a very quick process, with cognitive effort kept to a minimum. The person does not go digging through the pile looking for considerations that satisfy some minimum criterion of relevance, but rather picks a few easily accessible considerations from the top of the pile that look most relevant. If relevant considerations are successfully located, the respondent averages across those considerations and gives a response accordingly.

The memory-based model predicts unstable public opinion, based partly on stochastic processes, but this version of public opinion is not as unstable as the version put forth by Converse and others. Zaller identifies some predictable elements to public opinion, based on the information environment in which voters operate. The RAS model's predictions about opinion change indicate that there is at least some meaning behind public opinion as measured by polls and other methods. Perhaps politicians, being familiar as they are with the political information environment (indeed, they create much of this information), really can have some sense of public opinion in the manner @Kingdon1995 describes. Still, according to the memory-based model, there is a lot of noise in the signals politicians receive from the public.

Another class of public opinion theories is based on the online model of cognitive processing [@Hastie1986; @Lodge1989; @Taber2006]. According to these models, opinion constructs are updated each time new information related to the opinion object is encountered. Later iterations of this model have added motivated reasoning, in which the prior value of the tally affects how the new information is incorporated. For example, if a voter already dislikes Bill Clinton, then she will be more likely to view information about the Monica Lewinsky scandal as a reason to dislike him more, whereas a person with a more favorable prior attitude toward Bill Clinton might be prone to say the scandal does not really matter. This model implies that opinions will be relatively stable, though changes in response to information can occur. @Zaller1992a argues that the online model is simply a more modern version of the crystallized attitudes model.

Despite the conflicting mechanisms and conclusions of the different models, most public opinion scholars agree that information matters in public opinion, especially in terms of its stability. If citizens have information, they can give opinions that are at least more stable than they otherwise would be. Even in the online model, a lack of information could cause the running tallies of uninformed voters to easily swing from one valence to another. When citizens have appropriate information and can use it well, signals are strong. This brings up a couple of important questions. Do citizens have the information necessary for an informed public opinion, and do they know how to use the information they do have?

The answer to the first question is generally "no." Americans in particular fare quite poorly on tests of political knowledge [@DelliCarpini1996; @Kinder1998]. However, there is still a possibility that voters can leverage certain pieces of information in making rational political assessments, leading to stable and predictable public opinion despite the public's relative ignorance. Perhaps people can use simple cues as heuristics or shortcuts that allow them to reach the same conclusion they would make if fully informed. For example, relatively uninformed voters who knew the position of the insurance industry on a series of 1988 California ballot initiatives voted about the same way in the aggregate as better informed voters [@Lupia1994]. However, other research suggests the use of heuristics is not generally a satisfactory substitute for full information, and that less sophisticated voters often employ heuristics ineffectively or even incorrectly [@Kuklinski2000; @Kinder1998; @Lau2001]. More recent models of the policy process have either used assumptions that do not require fully informed voters [@Soroka2010] or explicitly assume that voters are not well-informed about all issues at all times [@Jones2005; @True1999].

Stability in public opinion and voting behavior can come from group identities, such as partisanship, religion, or social class [@Converse1964; @Dalton1993], as well as from self-interest [@Dalton1993; @Krosnick1990]. However, the effect of group identities on political attitudes seems to have generally declined in recent decades, leading to a more egocentric, "individualized" politics. [@Dalton1993]. Still, some group identities might affect attitudes on at least some issues. For example, studies have documented increasing racialization and partisan polarization of health politics in the US in recent years [@Tesler2012; @Henderson2011]. Self-interest also remains a strong predictor of attitudes on health policy [@Henderson2011], though there may be distinctions between peoples' opinions on their own experience with the health care system and their view of the system as a whole [@Soroka2013].

The models of public opinion presented above and findings of generally low information in the mass public imply that public opinion is not especially stable. Stochastic processes play at least some part in the formation of expressed preferences, though the degree of randomness involved is up for debate. It seems that opinion stability varies across contexts and issues. As discussed above, mass opinion is multidimensional, ambivalent, and "morselized." Thus, we might conceive of differences in the relative noisiness of some signals from the public. Just because scholars present evidence of a lack of stable, clear public opinion in certain issue areas does not mean opinion on all issues is equally unclear and unstable. The relative stability across issues requires empirical measurement, and evidence so far suggests significant variance.

In terms of policy representation, stable opinions provide more reliable signals for elected officials to follow. As explained above, stability is affected by  information. It is difficult for policy makers to distinguish informed voters from uninformed, but they can be aware of the aggregate amount of publicly available information surrounding an issue. When elites and the media talk more about an issue publicly, opinions on that issue can become more stable, holding individual-level awareness constant, and this in turn strengthens the public's position relative to elites. We might reasonably wonder, then, why elites would ever talk about policies publicly. Indeed, they often do not, preferring to operate behind closed doors. However, if political adversaries are talking about a policy issue, that might force elites to go on message themselves in order to not lose the public entirely. This zero-sum competition among elites can lead to a more robust information environment on an issue, and in turn to more stable public opinion. The predictions about valence still apply, but holding all else constant, we would expect to see policy makers more responsive to public opinion when there is more public information and reporting on an issue.

Group identities also affect the stability of public opinion, but group identities vary across members of the public, as does the salience of group identities. Thus, the possibility of affecting public opinion as a whole using group identities is limited. The analysis in chapter 2 on issue publics speaks more to this idea of heterogeneous public opinion signals across groups, and will not be tested further in this chapter.

## Salience

A third factor with potential implications for representation is salience, or the level of importance placed on an issue. This concept has factored very prominently into more recent political science theories [@Burstein2003]. The memory-based model [@Zaller1992a], for example, allows for the effects of salience on expressed opinions by positing that salient considerations will have greater weight in the process of forming an opinion. At an aggregate level, the salience of an issue affects how much the public responds to changes in policy or current conditions [@Soroka2010]. This in turn affects how much elected officials will respond to public opinion on the issue.

One way to conceptualize and measure salience is in terms of attention. At a macro level, theories of punctuated equilibrium in public policy are based on the limited attention citizens and institutions can devote to particular issues at a given time [@Jones2005; @True1999]. This is consistent with Downs' issue attention cycle [-@Downs1972]. @Kingdon1995 also sees cycles of attention to issues in his analysis of the policy areas of health and transportation, with instances of high attention leading at least to significant changes in the political agenda, if not public policy itself. Longer-term studies of health politics in general [@Starr1982; @Starr2011] and Medicare politics in particular [@Oberlander2003; @Marmor1970] also reveal shifts in attention and perceptions of crises in the health system over time. Changes in the overall salience of an issue can change the agenda, an important aspect of policy change.

As with valence and stability, the manner in which politicians perceive salience is important in determining representation. To a certain extent, the US Congress seems to be sensitive to shifts in salience in the manner described [@Jones2005]. However, Congress does not focus all of its attention on the issues the public most cares about. Punctuated equilibrium theorists [@Jones2005; @True1999] tend to explain this in terms of the government's higher institutional capacity, but other theories often explain this phenomenon as differences in the attentiveness and resources of different groups [@Lindblom1965; @Sabatier1988]. Institutional capacity is an important necessary condition identified by punctuated equilibrium models, but just because the government can devote attention to multiple issues does not mean it will without other incentives to do so. Given the evidence so far, it seems apparent that the government has the ability and the incentives to focus on issues about which the public feels most strongly, but that they also devote some attention to other, less salient issues. Thus, not all policy is based on what the public feels is most salient.

Despite these caveats, we might still expect more responsiveness to public opinion in response to changes in the salience of an issue. While pollsters may be able to report an opinion on any given issue, those opinions will not be as important to policy makers unless they are salient to many voters. One important nuance to this prediction is that the issues most voters deem important are probably also issues that draw attention from large and resource-rich groups of policy elites. A robust test of this hypothesis will probably require controls for this confounding factor.

## Summary and Implications

To summarize my hypotheses to this point, public opinion is expected to exert more consistent influence on representatives' behavior under the following conditions, considering each factor individually and holding all other factors constant:

* When public opinion clearly favors a change from the status quo
* When public opinion has a low variance
* When there is more publicly available information about an issue
* When an issue is more salient overall

Cases that satisfy these hypotheses to some extent are readily available, indicating that more rigorous tests are warranted. I plan to develop such tests, using available survey data, election returns, and/ or large demographic datasets.

# References
